okay
so today I want to talk about how we
talk about love and specifically I want
to talk about what's wrong with how we
talk about love so most of us will
probably fall in love a few times over
the course of our lives and in the
English language this metaphor falling
is really the main way that we talk
about that experience and I don't know
about you but when I conceptualize this
metaphor what I picture is straight out
of a cartoon like there's a man he's
walking down the sidewalk without
realizing it he crosses over an open
manhole and he just plummets into the
sewer below and I picture it this way
because falling is not jumping falling
is accidental it's uncontrollable it's
something that happens to us without our
consent and this this is the main way we
talk about starting a new relationship
so I am a writer and I'm also an English
teacher which means I think about words
for living and you could say that I get
paid to argue that the language we use
matters and I would like to argue that
many of the metaphors we use to talk
about love maybe even most of them are a
problem so in love we fall we're struck
we are crushed we swim we burn with
passion love makes us crazy and it makes
us sick our hearts ache and then they
break so our metaphors equate the
experience of loving someone to extreme
violence or illness
and they do and they position us as the
victims of unforeseen and totally
unavoidable circumstances so my favorite
one of these is smitten which is the
past participle of the word smite and if
you look this word up in the dictionary
you will see that it can be defined as
both grievous affliction and to be very
much in love so I tend to associate the
word smite with a very particular
context which is the Old Testament and
in the book of Exodus alone there are
sixteen references to smiting which is
the word that the Bible uses for the
vengeance of an angry god so here we are
using the same word to talk about love
that we used to explain a plague of
locusts right so how did this happen how
have we come to associate love with
great pain and suffering and why do we
talk about this ostensibly good
experience as if we are victims so these
are difficult questions but I have some
theories and to think this through I
want to focus on one metaphor in
particular which is the idea of love is
madness so when I first started
researching romantic love I found these
madness metaphors everywhere the history
of Western culture is full of language
that equates love to mental illness and
these are just a few examples of William
Shakespeare love is merely a madness
from as you like it Frederick Nietzsche
there's always some madness and love got
me looking got me looking so crazy love
from the great philosopher Beyonce null
[Music]
so I fell in love for the first time
when I was twenty and it was a pretty
turbulent relationship right from the
start and it was long-distance for the
cost first couple of years so for me
that meant very high highs and very low
lows and I remember one moment in
particular I was sitting on a bed in a
hostel in South America and I was
watching the person I love walk out the
door and you know it was late as nearly
midnight we've gotten into an argument
over dinner and when we got back to her
room he threw his things in the bag and
stormed out and while I can no longer
remember what that argument was about I
very clearly remember how I felt
watching him leave so I was 22 it was my
first time in the developing world and I
was totally alone
I had another week until my flight home
and he knew the name of the town that I
was in and the name of the city that I
needed to get to to fly out but I had no
idea how to get around
I had no guidebook and very little money
and I spoke no Spanish so someone more
adventurous than me might have seen this
as a moment of opportunity but I just
froze I just sat there and then I burst
into tears but despite my panic some
small voice in my head thought wow that
was dramatic I must really be doing this
love thing right because some part of me
wanted to feel miserable and loved and
it sounds so strange to me now but at 22
I longed to have dramatic experiences in
that moment I was irrational and furious
and devastated and weirdly enough I
thought that this somehow legitimized
the feelings I had for the guy who had
just left me so you know I think on some
level I wanted to feel a little bit
crazy because I thought that that was
how love works
and this really should not be surprising
considering that according to Wikipedia
there are eight films 14 songs two
albums and one novel with the title
Crazy Love so about half an hour later
he came back to our room we made up we
spent another mostly happy week
traveling together and then when I got
home I thought that was so terrible and
so great this must be a real romance so
I expected my first love to feel like
madness and of course it met that
expectation very well but loving someone
like that as if my entire well-being
depended on him loving me back was not
very good for me or for him but I
suspect this experience of love is not
that unusual most of us do feel a bit
mad in the early stages of romantic love
and in fact there is research to confirm
that this is somewhat normal
because neural chemically speaking
romantic love and mental illness are not
that easily distinguished this is true
so this study from 1999 used blood tests
to confirm that the serotonin levels of
the newly in love very closely resembled
the serotonin levels of people who'd
been diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive
disorder yes and low levels of serotonin
are also associated with seasonal
affection affective disorder and
depression so there is some evidence
that love is associated with changes to
our moods and our behaviors and there
are other studies to confirm that you
know most relationships begin this way
so researchers believe that the low
level sort of serotonin is correlated
with obsessive thinking about the object
of love which is like this feeling that
someone has set up camp in your brain
and most of us feel this way when we're
first of all in love but the good news
is that it doesn't always last that long
usually from a few months to a couple of
years so when I got back from my trip to
South America
I spent a lot of time alone in my room
checking my email desperate to hear from
the guy I loved and I decided that if my
friends could not understand my grievous
affliction and I did not need their
friendship so I stopped hanging out with
most of them and it was probably the
most unhappy year of my life but I think
I felt like it was my job to be
miserable because if I could be
miserable than I would prove how much I
loved him and if I could prove it then
we would have to end up together
eventually and this is the real madness
because there is no cosmic rule that
says that great suffering equals great
reward but we talk about love as if this
is true so our experiences of love are
both biological and cultural and our
biology tells us that love is good by
activating these reward circuits in our
brain and it tells us that love is
painful when after fight or a breakup
that neural chemical reward is withdrawn
and in fact maybe you've heard this
neural chemically speaking going through
a breakup is a lot like going through
cocaine withdrawal which I find
reassuring and then our length our
culture uses language to shape and
reinforce these ideas about love in this
case we're talking about metaphors about
pain and addiction and madness so it's
kind of an interesting feedback loop
right love is powerful and at times
painful and we express this in our words
and stories but then our words and
stories prime us to expect love to be
powerful and painful and what's
interesting to me is that all of this
happens in a culture that values
lifelong monogamy
so it seems like we want it both ways we
want love to feel like madness and we
want it to last an entire lifetime that
sounds terrible
so to reconcile this we need to either
change our culture or change our
expectations so imagine if we were all
less passive in love we were more
assertive more open-minded more generous
its instead of falling in love we
stepped into love I know that this is
asking a lot but I'm not actually the
first person to suggest this so in their
book the metaphors we live by linguist
Mark Johnson and Georgia Lake Hoff
suggest a really interesting solution to
this dilemma which is to change our
metaphors so they argue that metaphors
really do shape the way we experience
the world and that they can even act as
a guide for future actions like
self-fulfilling prophecies so Johnson
and Lake Hoff suggest a new metaphor for
love love is a collaborative work of art
and I really like this way of thinking
about love
so linguists talk about metaphors is
having entailments which is essentially
a way of considering all the
implications of or ideas contained
within a given metaphor and Johnson and
Lake Hoff talk about everything the
collaborating and a work of art entails
effort compromise patience shared goals
and these ideas align nicely with our
cultural investment and long-term
romantic commitment but they also work
well for other kinds of relationships
short-term casual polyamorous
non-monogamous asexual because this
metaphor brings much more complex ideas
to the experience of loving someone so
if love is a collaborative work of art
then love is an aesthetic experience
love is unpredictable love is creative
love requires communication and
discipline it is frustrating and
emotionally demanding
and love involves both joy and pain
ultimately each experience of love is
different so when I was younger it never
occurred to me that I was allowed to
demand more from love that I didn't have
to just accept whatever love offered
when fourteen-year-old Juliet first
meets her when 14 year old Juliet cannot
be with Romeo whom she has met four days
ago she does not feel disappointed or
angsty or is she she wants to die right
and just as a refresher at this point on
the play act three of five Romeo is not
dead he's alive he's healthy he's just
been banished from the city so I
understand that 16th century Verona is
unlike contemporary North America and
yet when I first read this play also at
age 14
Juliet's suffering made sense to me
reframing love is something I get to
create with someone I admire rather than
something that just happens to me
without my control or consent is
empowering it's still hard love still
feels totally maddening and crushing
some days and when I feel really
frustrated I have to remind myself my
job in this relationship is to talk to
my partner about what I want to make
together and this isn't easy either but
it's just so much better than the
alternative which is that thing that
feels like madness so this version of
love is not about winning or losing
someone's affection instead it requires
that you trust your partner and talk
about things when trusting feels
difficult which sounds so simple but is
actually a kind of revolutionary radical
act and this is because you get to stop
thinking about yourself
and what you're gaining or losing in
your relationship and you get to start
thinking about what you have to offer
this version of love allows us to say
things like hey we're not very good
collaborators maybe this isn't for us or
that relationship was shorter than I
have planned but it was still kind of
beautiful the beautiful thing about the
collaborative work of art is that it
will not paint or draw or sculpt itself
this version of love allows us to decide
what it looks like thank you